How to Travel Alone for the First time: A Guide to Planning Your First Solo Trip Without Losing Your Mind
Ahhh, your first solo trip. You’re likely feeling excited about traveling solo but also a little nervous, and that’s perfectly normal. I took my first solo trip nearly four years ago (to L.A.!) and have been traveling solo ever since. In fact, I’ve come to prefer it over traveling with others because I get to stick to my own schedule. As an experienced solo traveler, and someone who’s lived as a digital nomad for nearly four years, here are my top tips for taking your first solo trip.
What's Inside This Post
where to Go
If the idea of picking your first solo travel destination makes you want to crawl under a weighted blanket, start here. These low-pressure ideas are perfect for beginners.
Stay close to home
You don’t have to leave your home country for your first trip, or even your state. If the thought of solo traveling far away makes you feel anxious, consider going to a place you’ve already been or a popular weekend destination in your state.
Consider Taking a road trip
If the thought of flying alone stresses you out, take a good old-fashioned road trip. That way, you can go at your own pace, make as many stops as you need, and won’t have to stress about getting to the airport or navigating transit at your destination.
Go to the beach
What could be better than relaxing on a beach? It’s simple, fun, and doesn’t require a lot of mental energy when you get there. Here are a few great beachy destinations to choose from:Myrtle Beach, Gulf Shores, Miami. This would be fantastic to do in the winter, or let’s be honest, any time!
Go to a concert or event
If your favorite band is playing, but nowhere near you, that could be a great excuse to take a solo trip. You won’t have to worry about feeling awkward solo because you’ll blend in with the crowd, and you may even make some new friends!
Best first-time solo travel destinations in the U.S.
I chose these destinations based on walkability, ease of getting around, low overwhelm factor, and of course, fun!
Key West: Everyone is in a good mood, and most people in the touristy spots are there on vacation, so you’ll be in good company. Key West is a smaller city, and everything is centrally located, so it’s easy to get around. You can walk to just about everywhere.
Austin: Another great spot for your first solo trip. Stay downtown or in the South Congress neighborhoods to be able to walk to shops, concert venues, and great food.
New Orleans: You can’t go wrong with staying in the French Quarter in New Orleans. It’s very safe with lots of tourists, and everything is walkable.
Charleston, SC: All the cool, historic stuff is right downtown in Charleston, and beaches aren’t far. If you stay downtown, you’ll get to enjoy cobblestone roads, unique shops, and great food.
Asheville, NC: If you’re looking for the perfect blend of city and nature, look no further than Asheville. Stay downtown for the food, coffee shops, art, and craft beer, and take hikes or drives through the breathtaking Blue Ridge Mountains.
How to Know If a Destination Is Good for Solo Travelers
Walkability and transit: If driving stresses you TF out, this is going to be important. With Uber, you can get pretty much anywhere, but honestly, I’d rather walk. It’s worth it to me to pay a premium for a more walkable hotel vs. one where I’d have to worry about how I’m going to get around.
Safe neighborhoods: Any popular or touristy neighborhood is likely going to be safe. Don’t stay in a neighborhood you’ve never heard of.
Tips for Traveling Solo
The best tips for you will depend on what you want out of your trip. Here are a few for you:
Consider Your Goals
What are you looking for in a first solo trip? Do you want to meet people? Retreat to solitude? Lie on a beach? Your personal goals should guide how you plan your trip.
Book the Basics Early
Book your lodging and flight first. You always want to stay central, especially when traveling solo. If you’re looking to meet new people, consider staying in a hostel instead of a hotel. I’d recommend a hotel or hostel over an AirBnB for a first-timer because AirBnBs could be located anywhere, even if the host says “walkable to everything.” You likely don’t know the neighborhoods well enough to discern safety and walkability yet. Plus, AirBnBs often have annoying, overly complicated check-in procedures, and the last thing you want to have to worry about is your keypad battery dying.
If there are any tours you really want to go on or other activities you want to do, book those as well, but make sure you leave room for spontaneity and exploring.
Look at Transportation, but Don’t Stress Over It
Before you travel, you’ll want to:
* Figure out how to get from the airport to your lodging. Having a plan now means less stress later.
* Download offline maps in case service is spotty.
* Take screenshots of addresses so you don’t have to look them up every time.
* Take screenshots of any check-in instructions, if you end up getting an AirBnB after all. It can be annoying to look at the app or texts every time you need the door code.
Safety Tips for Solo Travelers
1. Keep your valuables close. When you leave for the day, carry only what you need. Don’t carry a big purse—a small crossbody will do the trick. If you need to carry a bag for other items, such as a tripod, don’t put any valuables in the bag.
2. Don’t put your phone in your back pocket. This makes it easy for thieves to steal. Front pocket or purse only.
3. Stay where it’s well-lit. Don’t go down any dark side streets by yourself.
4. Keep your phone charged. The last thing you want to do is be without your map.
5. Tell a friend where you are. Keep a trusted friend posted with your itinerary for the day.
How not to feel awkward when Traveling Solo
Every solo traveler feels awkward at some point, and that’s normal. Here’s how to mitigate that awkward feeling:
Book a Tour
I try to take at least one tour everywhere I go. It’s the easiest way to get oriented with your new city so that you feel less lost and more confident when exploring on your own.
Take your best friend
Solo travel can totally mean solo human travel. If you have a dog who travels well, consider booking a getaway with your dog at a pet-friendly destination.
Remember: No One Cares as Much as You!
This is a big one. Honestly, people are too wrapped up in their own worlds to care. Remember the last family vacation you took? You all were likely arguing over where to eat, what to do that day, and other matters and didn’t give one flip if you met someone who was alone.
FAQ: First Solo Trip
Is it weird to travel alone?
Absolutely not! It’s freeing and rewarding, and if anyone thinks it’s weird, who cares?
How do I take photos of myself?
The easiest way is to ask someone nearby–99% chance they’ll say yes. Alternatively, a phone stand or tripod with the Lensbuddy app will be your best bet.
Final Thoughts on Taking Your First Solo Trip
Solo travel isn’t about perfection: it’s about going anyway! Once you take that first solo trip, the next will be 10 times easier. As someone who’s done this countless times now, trust me on that one.