I Traveled Around the World Alone and Without a Plan—Here's My No. 1 Tip for Solo Travelers
As someone who has visited 73 countries, here's my best piece of advice for solo 


In 2014 and 2015, I traveled solo around the world without a plan for my blog, Drop Me Anywhere. I invited readers to vote on the destinations, and when the results were tallied, I’d leave for the chosen location in two weeks or less. While my way of travel isn’t for everyone, I learned many lessons and came away with some tips for those traveling alone.
My number one tip for solo travelers is this: It’s scarier to think about doing that trip than actually doing it. Many catastrophize what could go wrong, rather than considering all the exciting experiences they’ll have. The truth is, these same things can go wrong when traveling with others, too.
It’s just an airport.
You may be concerned with what to do once you land: “How will I know where to go?” “How do I get to my accommodation?”
Here’s the thing: It’s an airport and there will be signs leading you through the immigration and customs process (if needed), where to claim your luggage, and where to find ground transportation. Since English is the international language, most airports around the world offer signage in the local language and in English.
And if you’re still unsure after reading the signs, simply ask. I can’t tell you how many times simple instructions from a local resident have made things so much easier for me.


Getting lost is part of the adventure.
Getting lost is something I’m an expert at. I used paper maps for the first five locations readers chose for me. It wasn’t until I arrived in Malaysia that I downloaded Google Maps. And, while I’m very dependent on map apps now, I still sometimes get lost. And here’s a secret: This can be the best part.
One of the joys of traveling alone is getting lost. If you’re traveling with others, you’ll most likely try to figure it out among yourselves. But solo travel forces you to talk to others, and this can lead to genuine connections.
That’s how I discovered a lady making offerings in Bali, and later that evening, found myself taking a private yoga class in her open-air bamboo studio. It’s how I found the Irish pub in Budapest, where I became a regular. Getting lost also led me to meet Peter and Wendy, an Australian couple who directed me to a local movie theater and with whom I’m still in touch.
"But how will I find my way back to my hotel?" you may worry. You can always ask for directions at a local business or from a friendly pedestrian. And if it’s a concern that’s weighing on you, just catch an Uber or a taxi.
Similarly, this can work if you’re driving. Desperate while driving in Lisbon and trying to find my hotel after a Portuguese road trip, I pulled to the side of the road directly behind a taxi. Approaching the car, I asked the driver how much it would cost to take me to the hotel. He gave me a price, and I paid him cash up front before getting into my car and following him directly to my hotel’s driveway.


It's not as lonely as you think.
You might experience moments of loneliness, but that can be true even in a crowd. Traveling solo allows you to do what you want—on your own timeline. Want to go out to dinner? Go where you want, when you want. Bring a book, sit at the bar, and meet others, or take the opportunity to simply people-watch.
If you want more company, look up local events on Facebook groups and tourism board websites. Or, do as I’ve done, and talk to another solo traveler you meet at a bus stop and arrange to visit an attraction together.
If you’re traveling for a longer period, take a few hours or a day to volunteer. It’s how I’ve made fast friends with similar interests.
I’ve traveled to 73 countries, and my solo travels have left me with some of the best memories. Don’t let fear of the unknown stop you.