Solo travel - Zimbabwe & Zambia
I am 39M, Chinese, who recently travelled solo through Zimbabwe and Zambia. When I was researching how to explore the region, I struggled to find useful advice since many travellers tend to go with tours. After my recent trip, I would agree with them as navigating these countries on your own is not always easy, but not impossible. If you would like to travel by yourself, here are some of my experiences and tips.
1. Corruption – unfortunately, it is everywhere. From the moment you arrive, you’ll be greeted by the border officer, who will find every opportunity to ask for money. At the airport, this can happen during both the visa process and luggage checks, with requests often around US$20. In my experience, they frequently target Chinese tourists/ workers, maybe I was bias because I was stopped at every turn.
I also encountered several roadblocks during my trip. On one occasion, I was asked to pay a bribe because not wearing a seatbelt in the passenger seat was treated as a traffic offence. Since this happened just before the airport, I had little choice if I wanted to avoid missing my journey. Many people I met advised carrying small change to avoid unnecessary delays and complications.
2. Always use apps for transport – It is safe to use indrive and Yango to book cabs. You may still encounter drivers who try to negotiate for more, but the additional fees are usually within 1-2 dollars.
For coach travel between cities, InterAfrica (Zimbabwe) and UBZ (Zambia) are quite reliable. You can use whatsapp to book your tickets for InterAfrica.
3. Food – The locals commonly eat Nshima (Zambia)/ Sadza (Zim) with meat (BBQ, stew, fried) along with vegetables. They love fried chicken so you’ll find them everywhere.
I didn’t eat uncooked food, especially salad. I only drank bottled water. I tried some exotic food, like croc and game at reputable restaurants, who cater to tourists.
Whenever I felt unsafe, I just step into a fast food chain. I tried not to look at my phone while walking, as that can make you a target for petty crime.
4. Get used to African time – always allow plenty of buffer time for delays. I had an 18-hour train ride from Bulawayo to Vic falls.
5. Infrastructure – Zambia generally has better infrastructure than Zim, e.g. newer roads, working traffic lights, modern malls etc. In both countries, however, power cuts can happen from time to time, so it is a good idea to keep your phone charged and nearby, especially since it can double as a torch.
Overall, I did not experience violent crime, as long as I avoided certain areas. I was accompanied by locals when visiting Mbare Musika and flea markets. I strongly advise against going by yourself.
I had a great time exploring both countries and made many new friends along the way. Have fun travel!